.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Sergiy Duras
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd April 19, 2026
.Dt DURAS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm duras
.Nd daily notes as plain text files, with search and optional GPG encryption
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl c
.Nm
.Cm open
.Op Ar date
.Op Cm \-\- Ar editor-args ...
.Nm
.Cm append
.Op Fl d Ar date
.Ar text
.Nm
.Op Fl c
.Cm append
.Ar text
.Nm
.Op Fl c
.Cm show
.Op Ar date
.Nm
.Cm list
.Op Fl n Ar N
.Nm
.Cm search
.Op Fl i
.Ar keyword
.Nm
.Cm tags
.Op Ar tag
.Nm
.Cm stats
.Nm
.Cm export
.Op Ar directory
.Op Fl \-encrypt
.Nm
.Cm path
.Op Ar date
.Nm
.Cm dir
.Nm
.Cm today
.Nm
.Cm audit
.Nm
.Cm echo
.Op Ar date
.Nm
.Cm near
.Op Ar date
.Nm
.Cm mv
.Ar from
.Ar to
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
stores daily notes as plain text files.
.Pp
Each day is one file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
YYYY/MM/YYYY-MM-DD.dn
.Ed
.Pp
There is no database, no index, and no hidden state.
The filesystem is the source of truth.
Writes are atomic; notes are never partially written.
Future dates are rejected.
.Ss Date format
All commands that accept a
.Ar date
argument support two formats:
.Bl -tag -width "YYYY-MM-DD"
.It Ar YYYY-MM-DD
Absolute date.
.It Ar integer
Relative offset from today: 0 (today), \-1 (yesterday), +7 (one week ahead).
.El
.Ss Commands
Without arguments,
.Nm
opens today's note in
.Ev EDITOR .
.Bl -tag -width "export [directory]"
.It Cm open Op Ar date
Open note in
.Ev EDITOR .
New notes start with a header.
Arguments after
.Cm \-\-
are passed to the editor.
.It Cm append Op Fl d Ar date Ar text
Append a timestamped line.
.Ql \-
reads from stdin; empty input is rejected.
.Pp
With
.Fl c ,
encryption is done fully in memory; no plaintext temporary file is written.
.It Cm show Op Ar date
Print note to standard output.
.Pp
With
.Fl c ,
decrypt and print an encrypted note.
If both plain and encrypted notes exist for the same date, plain is shown
unless
.Fl c
is given.
.It Cm list Op Fl n Ar N
List notes, newest first.
.Ar N
is the count; 0 lists all.
Order is by filename (ISO date), not modification time.
Encrypted notes are marked with a key symbol.
.It Cm search Op Fl i Ar keyword
Search plain notes for a literal string.
Encrypted notes are skipped.
.It Cm tags Op Ar tag
Without
.Ar tag ,
list all
.Ql #tag
tokens with occurrence counts.
With
.Ar tag ,
list notes containing that tag.
Encrypted notes are skipped.
.It Cm stats
Show note counts, total size, date range, and consecutive writing streak.
.It Cm export Op Ar directory Op Fl \-encrypt
Create a timestamped
.Pa tar.gz
archive in
.Ar directory
(default: current directory).
.Pp
With
.Fl \-encrypt ,
the archive is piped directly into
.Xr gpg 1 ;
no plaintext archive is written to disk.
.It Cm path Op Ar date
Print the absolute path of a note file.
.It Cm dir
Print the notes root directory.
.It Cm today
Print today's date as
.Ql YYYY-MM-DD .
.It Cm audit
Validate the notes directory against the duras layout contract.
Checks performed:
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Only
.Ql YYYY/
directories at the notes root.
.It
Only
.Ql MM/
directories (01\(en12) inside each year directory.
.It
Only files named
.Pa YYYY-MM-DD.dn
or
.Pa YYYY-MM-DD.dn.gpg
in month directories.
.It
Filename date matches the enclosing
.Ql YYYY/MM/
path.
.It
No future-dated notes.
.It
No date with both
.Pa .dn
and
.Pa .dn.gpg
present.
.It
No broken symlinks at any level.
.El
.Pp
Never modifies anything.
Ignores
.Fl c .
Exits 0 if the collection is clean, 1 if any issues are found.
.It Cm echo Op Ar date
List paths of all notes that share the same month and day as
.Ar date
across all years.
Output is sorted descending by year.
.Pp
This is a pure calendar projection: no content is read, no inference
is performed.
.Ar date
defaults to today.
If no matches exist, a single line is printed to that effect.
.It Cm near Op Ar date
List paths of notes within three days before and after
.Ar date
(a seven-day window).
Only notes that exist on disk are shown, in chronological order.
Both plain and encrypted variants are included.
.Pp
The window is fixed at \(+-3 days; it is not configurable.
.Ar date
defaults to today.
.It Cm mv Ar from Ar to
Move a note from date
.Ar from
to date
.Ar to .
Both arguments must be in
.Ql YYYY-MM-DD
format; integer offsets are not accepted.
.Pp
Both
.Pa .dn
and
.Pa .dn.gpg
variants are moved if they exist.
Fails if no note exists at
.Ar from ,
or if any note already exists at
.Ar to .
Target directories are created automatically; empty source directories
are removed after the move.
Silent on success.
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl c , Fl \-confidential
Use GPG encryption.
Applies to
.Cm open ,
.Cm append ,
.Cm show ,
.Cm path .
.Pp
Decryption uses a temporary file (RAM-backed when available).
.It Fl d Ar date , Fl \-date Ar date
Select date for
.Cm append .
.It Fl i , Fl \-ignore-case
Case-insensitive search.
.It Fl n Ar N , Fl \-count Ar N
Limit output for
.Cm list .
.It Fl \-encrypt
Encrypt archive in
.Cm export .
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "DURAS_GPG_KEY"
.It Ev DURAS_DIR
Notes directory (default:
.Pa ~/Documents/Notes )
.It Ev EDITOR
Editor (fallback:
.Xr nano 1 ,
.Xr vi 1 ,
.Xr ed 1 )
.It Ev DURAS_GPG_KEY
GPG recipient (default: self)
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "YYYY/MM/YYYY-MM-DD.dn.gpg"
.It Pa YYYY/MM/YYYY-MM-DD.dn
Plain note
.It Pa YYYY/MM/YYYY-MM-DD.dn.gpg
Encrypted note
.It Pa /dev/shm
Temporary location for decrypted notes when available
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It 0
Success
.It 1
Generic error
.It 2
Not found
.It 3
Invalid input
.It 4
External tool failure
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss One-minute workflow
.Bd -literal -offset indent
duras                  # open today
duras append "note"    # quick capture
duras search note      # find it later
.Ed
.Pp
.Ss Basic use
.Bd -literal -offset indent
duras
duras open -1
duras open \-\- +10
.Ed
.Pp
.Ss Quick capture
.Bd -literal -offset indent
duras append "fix bug #todo"
duras append -d -1 "note"
cat file.txt | duras append -
.Ed
.Pp
.Ss Encrypted notes
.Bd -literal -offset indent
duras -c open
duras -c append "private"
duras -c show
.Ed
.Pp
.Ss Search and tags
.Bd -literal -offset indent
duras search error
duras search todo -i
duras tags
duras tags project
.Ed
.Pp
.Ss Listing and stats
.Bd -literal -offset indent
duras list
duras list -n 0
duras stats
.Ed
.Pp
.Ss Backup
.Bd -literal -offset indent
duras export ~/backup
duras export ~/backup \-\-encrypt
.Ed
.Pp
.Ss Shell integration
.Bd -literal -offset indent
grep -R "#todo" "$(duras dir)"
wc -l "$(duras path)"
.Ed
.Pp
.Ss Audit
.Bd -literal -offset indent
duras audit
duras audit && echo "clean"
duras audit || echo "problems found"
.Ed
.Ss Temporal projection
.Bd -literal -offset indent
duras echo
duras echo 2026-03-15
duras near
duras near 2026-01-01
.Ed
.Pp
.Ss Index repair
.Bd -literal -offset indent
duras mv 2026-04-17 2026-04-16
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gpg 1 ,
.Xr grep 1 ,
.Xr tar 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Sergiy Duras
.Sh CAVEATS
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Encrypted notes are not searchable.
.It
Depends on external
.Xr gpg 1 .
.El
.Sh BUGS
Report issues:
.Lk https://codeberg.org/duras/duras
